Software engineers design and create computer systems and applications to solve real-world problems.

[Featured image] Three software engineers collaborate on a project on their laptop computers in a brightly lit office.
Software engineers, sometimes called software developers, create software for computers and applications. If you’re an analytical thinker who enjoys solving problems and making digital products easier to use, you may find a career as a software engineer rewarding.

Software engineer tasks and responsibilities
Successful engineers know how to use the right programming languages, platforms, and architectures to develop everything from computer games to network control systems. In addition to building their own systems, software engineers also test, improve, and maintain software built by other engineers. 

In this role, your day-to-day tasks might include:

Designing and maintaining software systems

Evaluating and testing new software programs

Optimizing software for speed and scalability

Writing and testing code

Consulting with clients, engineers, security specialists, and other stakeholders

Presenting new features to stakeholders and internal customers

Systems developer vs. application developer
Software engineers will usually fall into one of two categories, systems developers or application developers. 

As a systems developer (sometimes called a backend engineer), you’ll build things like computer systems and networks that front-end (user-facing) applications will need. You can do this by:

Ensuring that different types of software programs communicate with each other on one platform

Creating and enforcing IT standards within an infrastructure 

Maintaining documentation of IT systems 

Updating to new technologies as needed

Collaborating with development teams, senior systems architects, and data science professionals 

Working as an application developer is more client-focused. You may work on either the front or back end of the system, designing software that the end user will interact with. Tasks might include:

Developing applications for iOS, Android, Windows, or other operating systems

Conducting an analysis of requirements and tweaking software as needed

Releasing software updates

Working with graphic designers, customer service staff, project managers, and other customer-facing departments 

Why should I pursue a career as a software engineer?
If you enjoy solving problems and have strong analytical skills, a career as a software engineer can be both fun and challenging. And as technology continues to evolve, the need for software developers continues to grow (much faster than average, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics) [1]. 

Choosing a career as a software engineer gives you opportunities to work in many different industries and fields, as nearly all businesses use software. Whether you enjoy finances, entertainment, sports, real estate, or some other industry, there’s a good chance there are jobs for software engineers. 

It’s also a career that allows flexibility in where you work. You may be able to work from home for companies in other states or even other countries. The important thing is that you’re able to meet deadlines and deliver a project on time.

Software engineer salary
Working as a software engineer can be challenging and engaging, and it also tends to pay well. The annual median salary for a software engineer in 2020 was $110,140, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics [1]. Jobs in software publishing tend to draw the biggest salaries. 

Career paths in software engineering
Once you become a software engineer, you can choose which path you want to take (applications or systems) and how far you want to progress with it. You can decide to advance toward a role as a senior software engineer, or you can continue gaining certifications and experience to advance to roles like project manager or systems manager. As a software engineer, you have both flexibility and mobility to create the career experience that is most appealing to you. 

How to become a software engineer 
Getting a job as a software engineer typically involves building the right technical and workplace skills. Some jobs might also require a certain degree or certification to validate your skills. Let’s take a closer look at some of the requirements for becoming a software engineer.

Software engineering skills
As a software developer, you’ll be designing software to help solve problems that real people face. This requires a combination of technical know-how and solid communication skills. If you’re considering this as a career, here are some skills you should focus on building:

Coding languages like Python, Java, C, C++, or Scala

Object-oriented programming

Database architecture

Agile and Scrum project management

Operating systems

Cloud computing

Version control

Design testing and debugging

Attention to detail

Software engineering certifications
By earning a certification, you can build new skills and validate those skills to potential employers. Some jobs might require a specific certification, so it’s a good idea to research some job listings of roles you’re interested in before preparing for a certification exam. Here are some common options:

Certified Software Development Professional (CSDP)

Certified Software Engineer

C Certified Professional Programmer (CLP)

C++ Certified Professional Programmer (CPP)

AWS Certified Developer

Microsoft Certified: Azure Fundamentals
